*
THAT NOISE.
CAN YOU HEAR IT?
IT'S COMING
FROM THE EARTH.
IT'S THE SOUND OF DESPAIR;
DESPAIR AND ANGER.
NORTH AND SOUTH, MILLIONS
OF MEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN
LIVE IN APPALLING CONDITIONS
IN EXTREME POVERTY,
EXTREME VIOLENCE,
EXTREME EXPLOITATION.
THEY ARE THE ORPHANS OF
THE TECHNOLOGICAL AGE;
PARIAHS AT THE TABLE OF
THE RICH AND POWERFUL.
THESE ARE THEIR STORIES.
SOME ARE SHOCKING;
OTHERS ALMOST TRIVIAL,
BUT IN THEIR OWN RIGHT
THEY ARE ALL EXTREME.
(SIRENS)
TODAY, IN WASHINGTON,
DC, THE WORLD BANK
AND THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY FUND
ARE HOLDING THEIR
ANNUAL MEETING.
THOUSANDS OF POLICE
OFFICERS HAVE MOVED IN
TO PROTECT THE
FINANCE MINISTERS
OF THE RICHEST
COUNTRIES ON EARTH.
PROTESTORS HAVE ALSO
GATHERED IN WASHINGTON.
TENS OF THOUSANDS ARE HERE
TO DENOUNCE THE POLICIES
AND PRACTISES OF THESE
TWO INSTITUTIONS AND THEIR
DISASTROUS CONSEQUENCES
ON THE GLOBAL ECONOMY.
THEY ARE ALSO HERE TO
DEMAND JUSTICE FOR THE
MILLIONS OF VICTIMS OF
EXPLOITATION AROUND THE WORLD.
EVERY MORNING THE SUN
RISES ON OVER 300 MILLION
MEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN
WHO ARE FORCED TO WORK
IN CONDITIONS OF
UTMOST SUBJUGATION.
MEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN
WHO HAVE LOST ALL CONTROL
OVER THEIR LIVES AND WHOSE
SURVIVAL RESTS IN THE HANDS
OF ABUSIVE INDIVIDUALS
AND CORPORATIONS.
AND WHEN THEY ARE NO
LONGER PRODUCTIVE,
THEY ARE SIMPLY
THROWN AWAY.
BROKEN, DRAINED,
HUMILIATED.
AS POLICE OFFICERS AND
PROTESTORS CLASH IN
WASHINGTON, OUT IN THE
WORLD, INCREASING NUMBERS
OF THE OPPRESSED LIFT
THEIR HEADS IN DEFIANCE.
AS DAWN BREAKS, A CAR
RACES TOWARD THE VILLAGE
OF DHAMKOT, SOME SIX
HOURS FROM CHANDIGHAR -
THE CAPITAL OF
PUNJAB PROVINCE.
JYOTI AND JEEMAN KUMAR
WILL TRY TO FREE THEIR
TWO CHILDREN WHO ARE
BEING HELD IN BONDAGE.
TRANSLATOR: MY MOTHER AND
BROTHER CAME TO VISIT.
THE CHILDREN WANTED TO
SPEND THE HOLIDAYS WITH THEM.
THEY SAID THEY WOULD
BRING THE CHILDREN HOME
AFTER THE HOLIDAYS.
THEY NEVER BROUGHT
THE CHILDREN BACK.
THEY TOOK THEM TO
WORK FOR FARMERS.
TRANSLATOR: MY MOTHER
BORROWED 1,500 RUPEES
AND GAVE VISHAL
AS SECURITY.
THEN SHE BORROWED 600
RUPEES FROM ANOTHER FARMER
AND GAVE HIM
DEEPAK IN EXCHANGE.
TRANSLATOR: NOBODY WANTED TO
HELP US BECAUSE WE ARE POOR.
I CLEAN HOUSES
FOR A LIVING.
THREE YEARS, I DID
EVERYTHING I COULD.
I EVEN WENT TO SEE THE
FARMERS THEMSELVES.
I TOLD THEM THAT I HAD
COME TO GET MY CHILDREN.
THEY ANSWERED THAT MY
MOTHER HAD GIVEN THEM
THE BOYS TO PAY
BACK HER DEBT.
THEN THEY SAID THAT
GOING TO THE POLICE
WOULDN'T HELP EITHER
SINCE THEY ARE ON
VERY GOOD TERMS
WITH THE POLICE.
I TRIED BUT I JUST
COULDN'T SAVE ENOUGH MONEY
TO GET MY SONS BACK.
THAT'S WHEN I HEARD
ABOUT JAI SINGH.
BONDAGE IS ONE OF THE
OLDEST FORMS OF SLAVERY.
SOMEONE BORROWS MONEY,
TO GUARANTEE
REIMBURSEMENT OF THE LOAN,
THE BORROWER IS FORCED
TO WORK FOR THE LENDER.
THE BORROWER BECOMES
COMPLETELY SUBSERVIENT
TO THE LENDER, WHO DECIDES
WHERE THE BORROWER
WILL WORK, AND IN
WHAT CONDITIONS.
THE BORROWER OFTEN HANDS
OVER A FAMILY MEMBER,
OFTEN A CHILD, AS
SURETY FOR THE LOAN.
SINCE THERE IS USUALLY ONLY
A SMALL AMOUNT OF MONEY OWED,
BORROWERS EXPECT TO REIMBURSE
THEIR DEBTS QUICKLY.
BUT THEY SOON DISCOVER
THAT BONDED LABORERS
CAN NEVER BUY BACK
THEIR FREEDOM.
LENDERS CHARGE SUCH
USURIOUS INTEREST RATES
THAT DEBTS ACTUALLY INCREASE
WITH EACH PASSING DAY.
JAI SINGH ESCORTS JYOTI TO
THE COMMISSIONER OF OATHS
TO SWEAR HER DEPOSITION
AND TO AUTHORIZE
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS TO
RESCUE THE CHILDREN.
TODAY IS A CRUCIAL DAY FOR
JYOTI AND JEEMAN KUMAR.
AFTER MONTHS OF
LEGAL MANEUVERING,
JAI SINGH HAS OBTAINED
AN ORDER FROM A JUDGE
OF THE SUPERIOR COURT
OF PUNJAB PROVINCE
ORDERING THE LIBERATION
OF THEIR TWO BOYS.
FLANKED BY BAILIFFS OF THE
COURT AND POLICE OFFICERS,
THEY ARE ON THEIR
WAY TO RAID THE FARM
WHERE THEY EXPECT TO FIND
DEEPAK, THEIR ELDEST SON.
BUT THERE IS AN
UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS.
TRANSLATOR: I
STARTED TO CRY.
WE WERE AFRAID
THEY'D KILLED HIM.
SINCE DEEPAK IS
NO LONGER HERE,
THE BAILIFFS WANT TO
CALL OFF THE SEARCH.
ACCORDING TO INDIAN LAW,
WHICH DATES BACK TO
THE BRITISH EMPIRE,
IF A MISSING PERSON
CANNOT BE FOUND ON
THE WORK PREMISES,
HE OR SHE IS NOT
CONSIDERED IN BONDAGE.
BUT JAI SINGH DISAGREES.
AFTER NEGOTIATING FOR MORE
THAN 15 MINUTES, JAI SINGH
CONVINCES THE BAILIFFS
TO CONTINUE THE SEARCH.
JAI SINGH IS LUCKY.
HIS THREAT WORKS.
TRANSLATOR: WE WERE JUST
ABOUT TO LEAVE FOR HOME
WHEN MY BROTHER SHOWED
UP ON A SCOOTER
WITH DEEPAK,
MY ELDEST SON.
HE WAS IN A
TERRIBLE STATE.
DURING HIS FOUR
YEARS IN BONDAGE,
FROM THE AGE
OF NINE TO 13,
DEEPAK WORKED FOR SIX
DIFFERENT EMPLOYERS.
HE TENDED FARM ANIMALS,
FEEDING AND WASHING THEM
AND CLEANING THE
FARM BUILDINGS.
HE WORKED SEVEN
DAYS A WEEK,
FROM DAYBREAK UNTIL
LONG AFTER SUNSET.
AFTER FREEING DEEPAK,
THEY IMMEDIATELY HEAD OUT
TO SEARCH FOR VISHAL,
THEIR YOUNGEST SON.
THEY FIND HIM IN
ANOTHER VILLAGE,
ABOUT THIRTY
KILOMETRES AWAY.
HE IS LIVING
WITH HIS GRANDMOTHER,
WHO HIRED HIM OUT AS A
WAITER TO A SMALL TEA SHOP.
TRANSLATOR: IF WE HAD
MONEY, NONE OF THIS
WOULD HAVE HAPPENED.
WE WERE TOO POOR TO
PAY OFF THE DEBTS,
BUT THE FARMERS SHOULD HAVE
PAID THE BOYS THEIR DUE.
I WANT TO SEE THE
EXPLOITERS PUNISHED.
(SINGING)
TODAY IS GOOD FRIDAY AND
THE CATHOLIC FAITHFUL
HAVE GATHERED TO MAKE THE
STATIONS OF THE CROSS.
IT IS A TIME TO REFLECT
ON THEIR SITUATION,
BUT ALSO A TIME TO DENOUNCE
THEIR LIVING CONDITIONS.
THEY ARE DESCENDANTS OF
SLAVES AND THEY HAVE
DECIDED TO TAKE CHARGE
OF THEIR DESTINY.
(SINGING)
EASTER WEEK MARKS
THE BEGINNING OF
THE SUGAR CANE HARVEST.
FOR THESE WORKERS IT IS
ALSO AN OPPORTUNITY
TO CHALLENGE THE CONDITIONS
OF SEVERE EXPLOITATION
IN WHICH THEY LIVE.
MY NAME IS
ELIFAITE LAGUERRE.
I WAS BORN IN BELLE-ANSE
IN HAITI IN 1963.
*
TRANSLATOR: WORKING IN THE
CANE FIELDS IS HARD WORK.
WE GET UP AT FOUR
IN THE MORNING.
WE TAKE A BREAK FROM
TWELVE TO TWELVE THIRTY.
THEN WE WORK UNTIL EIGHT
OR NINE O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.
WE HAVE TO WORK EVERY DAY.
IF WE DON'T WORK EVERY
DAY, WE CAN'T SURVIVE.
ELIFAITE LAGUERRE HAS
BEEN CUTTING SUGAR CANE
SINCE THE AGE OF 14, WHEN
HE FIRST CAME TO THE
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
WITH HIS FATHER.
THEY FLED TO ESCAPE
THE EXTREME POVERTY
AND THE DICTATORSHIP OF
JEAN-CLAUDE DUVALIER
IN THEIR NATIVE HAITI.
TRANSLATOR: WE DON'T MAKE
MUCH MONEY CUTTING CANE.
YEAR AFTER YEAR WE ALWAYS
MAKE THE SAME AMOUNT.
A TON OF CANE, FOR INSTANCE,
EARNS YOU 30 TO 35 PESOS.
FOR THREE OR FOUR DAYS
OF WORK, WE'RE PAID
100 TO 150 PESOS AND IT
COSTS MONEY TO LIVE.
SINCE NATIVE DOMINICANS
HAVE ALWAYS REFUSED
TO ACCEPT SUCH POOR
WORKING CONDITIONS,
THE DOMINICAN GOVERNMENT
AND SUGAR COMPANIES HAVE
TRADITIONALLY TURNED TO
HAITI FOR THEIR CHEAP LABOR.
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
HAITIANS CROSS THE BORDER
IN HOPES OF FINDING
A BETTER LIFE.
SOME COME LEGALLY, BUT MOST,
LIKE ELIFAITE LAGUERRE,
ARE ILLEGAL ALIENS.
TO KEEP THEM APART FROM
THE LOCAL POPULATION
AND KEEP THEM
UNDER TIGHTER REIN,
HAITIAN WORKERS ARE
HOUSED RIGHT IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE PLANTATIONS IN
CAMPS CALLED "BATAYES".
A FORM OF APARTHEID.
"NEGROS", AS THEY ARE
CALLED, HAVE NO RIGHTS
AND ARE VICTIMS OF
THE WORST ABUSES.
TRANSLATOR:
IT'S NOT RIGHT.
THIS IS NO WAY TO
LIVE, IT'S HORRIBLE.
THIS LIFE IS FIT FOR
ANIMALS, NOT FOR PEOPLE.
HUMAN BEINGS SHOULDN'T
LIVE IN THESE CONDITIONS.
TRANSLATOR: THEY GIVE
THEM A FEW PESOS AND
THINK THEY CAN DO WHATEVER
THEY WANT WITH THEM.
IT'S APPALLING.
IT'S A PRODUCT OF
CAPITALISM, OF COURSE,
BUT IT COMES VERY
CLOSE TO SLAVERY.
PIERRE RUQUOY IS
CO-FOUNDER OF
CENTRO PUENTE,
AN NGO DEVOTED TO
HELPING HAITIAN
WORKERS IN THE BATEYES.
BORN IN BELGIUM, RUQUOY
HAS BEEN LIVING IN
THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
FOR OVER TWENTY YEARS.
HE IS THE ONLY PRIEST WHO
LIVES WITH THE WORKERS
IN THE BATEYES.
TRANSLATOR: THE BASIC PROBLEM
IS THAT THIS IS A GROUP
OF PEOPLE WHICH HAS BEEN
HUMILIATED, DESPISED,
DEPRIVED EVEN OF THE RIGHT
TO SELF-DETERMINATION.
IN FACT, NONE OF THE 30
ARTICLES IN THE UNIVERSAL
DECLARATION OF HUMAN
RIGHTS IS RESPECTED HERE.
NOT ONE.
IN THE 1990'S,
UNDER PRESSURE
FROM INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS
LIKE THE WORLD
BANK AND THE IMF,
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
BEGAN TO PRIVATIZE ALL
OF ITS SUGAR COMPANIES.
FOREIGN INVESTORS, THROUGH
DOMINICAN COMPANIES,
TOOK OVER
THE INDUSTRY.
IN BARAHONA, THE MAJOR
INVESTORS ARE FROM GUATEMALA.
TRANSLATOR: THE NEW OWNERS,
THE CAMPOLLO FAMILY,
AL OWN A SUGAR
COMPANY IN GUATEMALA
CALLED MADRE-TIERRA.
I LOOKED INTO WHO
THESE PEOPLE ARE.
I DISCOVERED THAT
BISHOP GIRARDI,
WHO WAS MURDERED IN
GUATEMALA, WROTE A REPORT
ON HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
IN THE 80'S IN WHICH HE
DENOUNCED THE MADRE-TIERRA
SUGAR COMPANY.
MADRE-TIERRA MEANS
"MOTHER EARTH".
BISHOP GERARDI'S REPORT
STATES THAT IN THE '80S,
SEVEN OR EIGHT UNION
WORKERS WERE MURDERED
AT THE MADRE-TIERRA
SUGAR COMPANY.
A CRISIS IS BREWING
FOR THE NEW OWNERS
WHO HAVE INTRODUCED
NEW METHODS OF
WEIGHING AND PAYING
FOR THE SUGAR CANE.
IT'S SATURDAY MORNING
AND A UNION MEETING
HAS BEEN CALLED
IN BATEYE #5.
CANE CUTTERS FROM
ALL BATEYES HAVE COME,
ALONG WITH A
COMPANY SPOKESMAN.
(WORKERS BEGIN TALKING
AMONG THEMSELVES)
TRANSLATOR: THIS TYPE OF
GOVERNMENT ALWAYS DEFENDS
THE INTERESTS OF
BIG CORPORATIONS.
THE DOMINICAN GOVERNMENT
APPOINTED AN ARMY COLONEL
TO HEAD THE CIVILIAN
SECURITY TEAM
AT THE SUGAR COMPANY.
SO, IN FACT, IT'S A
PARAMILITARY GROUP.
I THINK, INEVITABLY,
IF PRESSURE FROM THE
WORKERS KEEPS MOUNTING,
THERE WILL BE REPRESSION.
IT'S A DISGRACE FOR
HUMANITY THAT IN THIS
DAY AND AGE PEOPLE ARE
SUBJECTED TO THIS ABUSE
TO MAKE A PRODUCT THAT
GOES TO THE UNITED STATES
AND ALL OVER THE WORLD -
A PRODUCT THAT ENDS UP
ON THE TABLES OF MANY
PEOPLE WHO MAY BE
WATCHING THIS RIGHT NOW
AND WHO HAVE NO IDEA
THAT THEIR SUGAR BOWL
IS BRIMMING WITH
THE SWEAT AND BLOOD
OF THEIR FELLOW MAN.
MONDAY MORNING.
AS IT DOES EVERY MORNING,
SHORTLY AFTER SUNRISE
A BUS COMES TO DRIVE THE
WORKERS TO THE FIELDS.
THE CANE CUTTERS
ARE ALL HERE.
TRANSLATOR: WE CAN'T
STAND BY DOING NOTHING.
WE HAVE TO FIGHT.
LIVE OR DIE.
WE HAVE TO SPEAK UP.
THINGS HAVE GOT TO CHANGE AND
WE HAVE TO DO IT TOGETHER.
ONLY TWO WORKERS
GET ON THE BUS.
IT'S A STRIKE.
HOW LONG WILL THEY HOLD
OUT AGAINST THE COMPANY?
AT THE CORNER OF UNION
SQUARE AND 14TH STREET,
A PROTEST MARCH LIKE
ANY OF THE HUNDREDS
OF DEMONSTRATIONS IN THE
AMERICAN METROPOLIS.
BUT THESE PROTESTORS
ARE DIFFERENT.
THEY ARE TOMATO PICKERS
WHO HAVE COME ALL THE WAY
FROM FLORIDA.
THEY'RE HOLDING
DEMONSTRATIONS IN ALL THE
MAJOR CITIES IN THE
NORTH-EASTERN STATES
TO PROTEST THEIR
EXPLOITATION
AT THE HANDS OF A
MAJOR CORPORATION.
THAT CORPORATION IS THE
FAST-FOOD GIANT, TACO BELL.
TRANSLATOR: WE CAME
UP FROM IMMOKALEE
IN FLORIDA TO HOLD
THIS DEMONSTRATION;
TO PRESS OUR DEMAND
FOR A RAISE.
WE'VE BEEN WORKING
FOR THE SAME WAGES
FOR THE PAST 20 YEARS.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE HERE.
MY NAME IS FELICIANO
MARTINEZ HERNANDEZ.
I'M FROM MEXICO, FROM
THE STATE OF PUEBLA.
(SINGING)
(APPLAUSE)
FELICIANO MARTINEZ
HAS LIVED IN
THE UNITED STATES FOR
MORE THAN 10 YEARS.
EVERY MORNING HE COMES TO
THIS PARKING LOT IN THE
HEART OF THE TOWN OF
IMMOKALEE TO FIND WORK.
THIS IS WHERE CONTRACTORS
COME TO HIRE THE LABORERS
THEY NEED THAT DAY.
IN THE IMMOKALEE AREA ALONE,
THERE ARE OVER 20,000
DAY LABORERS OUT LOOKING
FOR WORK EVERY MORNING.
TRANSLATOR: ALL OF US
THOUGHT THAT AS SOON AS
WE GOT HERE, WE'D MAKE
LOTS OF EASY MONEY.
BUT INSTEAD WE'RE POOR.
DIRT POOR, BROKE.
FELICIANO AND A FRIEND
GO FROM BUS TO BUS.
NOT ONLY DOES HE HAVE
TO FIND WORK, BUT EVERY
SINGLE DAY HE ALSO HAS
TO NEGOTIATE HIS WAGES.
TRANSLATOR: SOME PAY 40
OR 45 CENTS A BUCKET.
IT DEPENDS ON
THE CONTRACTORS.
OTHERS ONLY PAY
30 CENTS A BUCKET.
THE MEN IN CHARGE OF THE
PICKING SET THE PRICES
AND THEY VARY
ALL THE TIME.
TRANSLATOR: FOR WORKERS
IN THE TOMATO FIELDS,
WORKING CONDITIONS
ARE THE SAME HERE
AS IN ANY THIRD
WORLD COUNTRY.
WHEN I GOT HERE, I WAS
HIRED TO PICK TOMATOES.
AT THE END OF MY FIRST
DAY, I COULDN'T EVEN
WALK OUT OF THE FIELD.
LUCAS BENITEZ IS ONE OF THE
LEADERS OF THE COALITION
FOR IMMOKALEE WORKERS,
A COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION
CREATED IN 1993 BY THE
WORKERS THEMSELVES
TO FIGHT FOR
THEIR RIGHTS.
TRANSLATOR: IN THE UNITED
STATES, AGRICULTURAL
WORKERS ARE EXCLUDED
FROM LABOR LAWS.
THERE ARE LAWS THAT
PROTECT WORKERS
IN EVERY OTHER INDUSTRY
IN THIS COUNTRY,
AND THAT GIVE THEM
THE RIGHT TO ORGANIZE.
BUT WE ARE NOT COVERED
BY ANY OF THOSE LAWS.
TRANSLATOR: THIS BUCKET
HOLDS 33 POUNDS OF TOMATOES.
WE HAVE TO HURRY OVER TO THE
TRUCKS TO EMPTY OUR BUCKETS.
WE HAVE TO RUN
BECAUSE THE OVERSEERS
PUT A LOT OF
PRESSURE ON US.
TO EARN A MINIMUM
AMOUNT, WE HAVE TO
FILL 100 BUCKETS A DAY.
IT TAKES 100 BUCKETS TO EARN
40 TO 45 DOLLARS A DAY.
BY THE END OF THE DAY,
FELICIANO HAS PICKED
AND CARRIED 3,300
POUNDS OF TOMATOES.
AT THE END OF HIS SIX-DAY
WEEK, HE WILL HAVE PICKED
AND CARRIED NEARLY 20,000
POUNDS OF TOMATOES
AND EARNED 240 DOLLARS.
TRANSLATOR: IN 1978,
IMMOKALEE WORKERS EARNED
40 CENTS FOR A 33-POUND
BUCKET OF TOMATOES.
IN 2002, IMMOKALEE
WORKERS STILL EARN
40 TO 45 CENTS A BUCKET.
LIVING CONDITIONS ARE
VERY BAD; THEY'RE AWFUL.
LANDLORDS CHARGE 250
TO 275 DOLLARS A WEEK.
JUST TO AFFORD A
PLACE TO SLEEP,
WE HAVE TO PACK OURSELVES
IN LIKE SARDINES.
TRANSLATOR: FIVE OF US
LIVE HERE IN THIS HOUSE.
THREE OF US
SHARE THIS ROOM.
IT'S SMALL, RIGHT?
IT'S REALLY CRAMPED
FOR THREE PEOPLE.
HERE'S THE TABLE.
THIS IS WHERE THE
FIVE OF US EAT.
THIS IS MY BED AND I
KEEP ALL OF MY THINGS
IN THIS SUITCASE.
IT SITS ON THIS
BUCKET BECAUSE
THERE'S NOWHERE
ELSE TO PUT IT.
AS YOU CAN SEE THERE'S
NOT MUCH ROOM.
THE OTHER GUY WHO
SLEEPS HERE IS JUST AS
CRAMPED FOR SPACE AND HE
PILES HIS STUFF UP TOO.
EVERYBODY KEEPS THEIR
STUFF IN A PILE
BECAUSE THERE'S JUST
NO ROOM FOR IT.
THIS IS ALL I OWN. I
CAN'T HAVE ANYTHING ELSE.
I DON'T MAKE ENOUGH
TO BUY ANYTHING ELSE.
IN PHILADELPHIA THE
COALITION HAS GARNERED THE
SUPPORT OF THE KENSINGTON
WELFARE RIGHTS UNION,
THE LARGEST LOBBY
FOR THE RIGHTS OF
THE UNDERPRIVILEGED
IN PENNSYLVANIA.
REACTION IN PHILADELPHIA
IS OPEN AND FRANK.
YOU PEOPLE ARE
SO PATHETIC.
YOU KNOW WHAT?
THEY CREATE
JOBS FOR PEOPLE.
LIKE EVERYBODY ELSE ON
THIS STREET, WHY DON'T
ALL OF YOU GO GET THEM?
EXCUSE ME, SIR.
DID YOU JUST CALL
ME A "YUPPIE SLUT"?
IS THAT WHAT YOU
JUST CALLED ME?
DON'T CALL ME
A YUPPIE SLUT.
THE BOYCOTT AGAINST TACO
BELL BEGAN IN THE SPRING
OF 2001.
IT CAME AFTER SEVERAL
YEARS OF FRUITLESS
NEGOTIATIONS WITH
PLANTATION OWNERS.
INSPIRED BY A SIMILAR
CAMPAIGN AGAINST
THE SPORTING GOODS
MANUFACTURER NIKE,
THE COALITION DECIDED TO
TARGET TACO BELL,
THE NUMBER ONE BUYER
OF FLORIDA TOMATOES.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN WE
BEGAN THE BOYCOTT,
TACO BELL SAID IT WOULD
NEVER INTERVENE IN ANY WAY
IN A CONFLICT BETWEEN THE
WORKERS AND THE RANCHEROS.
"COMPANY POLICY", THEY SAID.
WHO ARE THE RANCHEROS?
TRANSLATOR: THEY'RE
AMERICANS, MOSTLY WHITES.
BUT WHEN I SAY RANCHERO,
I'M NOT TALKING ABOUT
A SMALL LANDOWNER WITH
200 ACRES OF TOMATOES;
I'M TALKING
THOUSANDS OF ACRES.
THESE ARE COMPANIES WITH
REPORTED EARNINGS
OF 79 MILLION
DOLLARS A YEAR.
THE SMALLEST COMPANY
REPORTED AN ANNUAL PROFIT
OF 25 MILLION DOLLARS.
SO, THEY'RE LARGE
CORPORATIONS.
AMERICAN AGRICULTURE DEPENDS
EXTENSIVELY ON ITS MANPOWER.
EIGHTY-FIVE PERCENT OF
ALL FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
ARE HAND PICKED.
IT'S AN INDUSTRY
THAT GENERATES OVER
35 BILLION DOLLARS A YEAR.
TRANSLATOR: CARRYING
BUCKETS FULL OF TOMATOES
ALL DAY WEARS YOU OUT SO
MCUH THAT WHEN YOU GET
OFF WORK, YOU DON'T
EVEN FEEL LIKE MOVING.
WE HAVE HEADACHES
AND BACK ACHES.
OUR SHOULDERS HURT
AND OUR LEGS AND FEET
AFTER ALL THAT BENDING
DOWN, STANDING UP,
AND BENDING AGAIN
TO PICK THE TOMATOES.
THEN THERE'S THE
SPRAY, THE PESTICIDES.
WITHOUT THE SPRAY,
THERE'D BE NO HARVEST.
BUT A LOT OF US ARE
ALLERGIC TO THE SPRAY.
LOOK. SEE THESE MARKS.
AFTER 30 MINUTES OF WORK,
WHAT YOU SEE HERE
WON'T GO AWAY.
THAT'S WHAT THE PESTICIDES
LEAVE ON YOUR BODY.
AND IT GOES RIGHT THROUGH
YOUR SKIN AND YOU FEEL IT
ALL OVER YOUR BODY.
CONDITIONS ARE VERY
HARD FOR THE WORKERS
BUT WE HAVE NO CHOICE.
YOU'VE GOTTA EAT.
(SINGING)
TRANSLATOR: IT'S A REAL
MESS, NOT JUST FOR ME
BUT FOR EVERYONE
WHO COMES HERE.
WE'RE EXHAUSTED,
COMPLAINING;
WE'RE AT THE END
OF OUR ROPE.
TO TELL THE TRUTH,
I FEEL...
HOW CAN I PUT IT?
SAD TO SEE THE
STATE WE'RE IN.
(CROWD YELLING
JUSTICE NOW!)
IN WASHINGTON, FELICIANO
MARTINEZ AND THE MEMBERS
OF THE COALITION HAVE
JOINED THE PROTEST MARCH
AGAINST THE WORLD
BANK AND THE IMF.
THEY KNOW WHAT IT MEANS TO BE
UP AGAINST INDUSTRY GIANTS.
AFTER 10 YEARS OF
FIGHTING, REPEATED STRIKES
INCLUDING TWO
HUNGER STRIKES AND TWO
BOYCOTT CAMPAIGNS ALL
OVER THE UNITED STATES,
THEY HAVE WON NOTHING.
(CROWD: JUSTICE NOW!)
TWO DAYS AFTER RESCUING
DEEPAK AND VISHAL,
JAI SINGH IS BACK
ON THE ROAD.
THIS TIME HE IS ON HIS
WAY TO FREE FIVE FAMILIES
- 35 PEOPLE IN ALL - WHO
ARE WORKING AS SLAVES
IN A BRICK FACTORY.
A FEW HOURS AFTER
ELIFAITE LAGUERRE
AND THE OTHER CANE CUTTERS
START THEIR STRIKE ACTION,
FIRE BREAKS OUT IN A
FIELD NEAR THE BATAYES.
ARSON OR ACCIDENT,
NO ONE KNOWS,
BUT TEMPERS ARE
AT THE FLASHPOINT.
SOMEWHERE BETWEEN THE
EXTREME DESTITUTION
OF SOME AND THE EXTREME
WEALTH OF OTHERS,
HUMANKIND IS
GROWING RESTLESS.
ANGER IS RUMBLING.
CAN YOU HEAR THEIR VOICES?
THEIR STORY IS ONGOING.
*